#The relationship between carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), mean years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) per capita, poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) ,and life expectancy at birth

##Introduction:

Provide some relevant background information on the topic so that someone unfamiliar with it will be prepared to understand the rest of your proposal
Clearly state the question you will try to answer with your project
Identify and describe the dataset that will be used to answer the question

###Life expectancy 

Life expectancy is a crucial metric in assessing the wellbeing of populations, and as such, is of pertinence in both medical and socioeconomic research. Essentially, life expectancy provides the average age of death in a population, revealing general insight into human mortality (Roser, Ortiz-Ospina & Ritchie, 2013). Life expectancy has risen drastically in industrialized communities since the 19th century due to the advent of new technology and more advanced healthcare. Indeed, life expectancy has globally increased from 2000 to 2019, from 66.8 years in 2000 to 73.4 years in 2019 (World Health Organization, 2019). However, this increase is not truly equal - countries with lower human development have consistently reported lower life expectancies, leading to a large discrepancy in health worldwide (Roser et al., 2013). As human societies develop new structures and technologies, the factors influencing life expectancy grow. In this project, we will analyze the effects of carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), mean years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) per capita, and poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP). Under the assumption that higher life expectancy leads to positive contributions to the economy, as well as general human development, it is important to determine what impedes or enhances the life expectancy of the population.

The use of fossil fuels has increased dramatically over the years following the industrial revolution, and remains popular today. As a result, its byproduct, carbon dioxide, has also increased in concentration in the atmosphere. Several decades of research over the years have indicated that rising air pollution caused by fossil fuel emissions threatens local ecosystems and accelerates global warming (Balakrishnan et al., 2018). As such, air pollution poses a large threat to the population's health, and therefore life expectancy. 




The question we are trying to answer is that how do carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), mean years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) per capita, poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) affect life expectancy at birth? Is there a relationship between each factor and life expectancy at birth?

The datasets we use are from United Nations Development Programme and world bank. The one from United Nations Development Programme is about the components of human development index, trends in human devlopment index, inequality-adjusted human devlopment index, gender development index, and gender inequality index. The other one from world bank is about poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population). 

Preliminary exploratory data analysis:
Demonstrate that the dataset can be read from the web into R 
Clean and wrangle your data into a tidy format
Using only training data, summarize the data in at least one table (this is exploratory data analysis). An example of a useful table could be one that reports the number of observations in each class, the means of the predictor variables you plan to use in your analysis and how many rows have missing data. 
Using only training data, visualize the data with at least one plot relevant to the analysis you plan to do (this is exploratory data analysis). An example of a useful visualization could be one that compares the distributions of each of the predictor variables you plan to use in your analysis.

Methods:
We will select 5 columns, Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), Mean years of schooling, Gross national income (GNI) per capita, Poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population), and Life expectancy at birth. 

We will combine countries with very high human development and high human devlopment into high human developed countries and also combine countries with medium human development and low human development into low human developed countries. 

Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), Mean years of schooling, Gross national income (GNI) per capita, Poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) are varibales that we will use to predict Life expectancy at birth. 

We will use scatterplot graphs to visualize the results. We will make 4 scatterplots graph for life expectancy at birth vs factors respectively; one for carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), one for mean years of schooling, one for gross national income (GNI) per capita, and one for poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) . 


Expected outcomes and significance:
We expect to find the relationship between the 4 factors, carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), mean years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) per capita, poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population), and life expectancy at birth. 

We also expect to use the data for Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production), mean years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) per capita, poverty headcount ratio at $6.85 a day (2017 PPP) (% of population) to predict Life expectancy at birth. Our hypothesis is that as Carbon dioxide emissions, mean years of schooling, and gross national income increases, and povert heawdcount ratio decreases, life expectancy at birth increases. 

These findings will enable us to compare the life expectancy at birth between high human developed countries and low human developed countries. We can also .... (TO DO) 

How can low human developed countries increase their life expectancy at birth? 

It is known that the model defining how SCC (Social Cost of Carbon) needs to be redesigned. Should life expectancy at birth be one of the parameters to be considered in the new model?


Citations:
Max Roser, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina and Hannah Ritchie (2013) - "Life Expectancy". Published online at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from: 'https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy' [Online Resource]

World Health Organization, (2020). Ghe: Life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. World Health Organization. Retrieved October 24, 2022, from https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/mortality-and-global-health-estimates/ghe-life-expectancy-and-healthy-life-expectancy 

Close
T.D. Hill, A.K. Jorgenson, P. Ore, K.S. Balistreri, B. Clark
Air quality and life expectancy in the United States: an analysis of the moderating effect of income inequality
SSM-Popul. Health, 7 (2019), Article 100346